A BAD MEME—A contagious idea—began spreading through the United States
in the 1980s: America is in decline, the world is going to hell, and our
children's lives will be worse than our own. The particulars are now
familiar: Good jobs are disappearing, working people are falling into
poverty, the underclass is swelling, crime is out of control. The
post-Cold War world is fragmenting, and conflicts are erupting all over
the planet. The environment is imploding—with global warming and ozone
depletion, we'll all either die of cancer or live in Waterworld. As for
our kids, the collapsing educational system is producing either
gun-toting gangsters or burger-flipping dopes who can't read.

By the late 1990s, another meme began to gain ground. Borne of the
surging stock market and an economy that won't die down, this one is
more positive: America is finally getting its economic act together, the
world is not such a dangerous place after all, and our kids just might
lead tolerable lives. Yet the good times will come only to a privileged
few, no more than a fortunate fifth of our society. The vast majority in
the United States and the world face a dire future of increasingly
desperate poverty. And the environment? It's a lost cause.

The most ambitious, future-defining stories from our favorite writers.

BUT THERE'S A new, very different meme, a radically optimistic
meme: We are watching the beginnings of a global economic boom on a
scale never experienced before. We have entered a period of sustained
growth that could eventually double the world's economy every dozen
years and bring increasing prosperity for—quite literally—billions of
people on the planet. We are riding the early waves of a 25-year run of
a greatly expanding economy that will do much to solve seemingly
intractable problems like poverty and to ease tensions throughout the
world. And we'll do it without blowing the lid off the environment.



What Happens to Your Data After You Die?

If this holds true, historians will look back on our era as an
extraordinary moment. They will chronicle the 40-year period from 1980
to 2020 as the key years of a remarkable transformation. In the
developed countries of the West, new technology will lead to big
productivity increases that will cause high economic growth—actually,
waves of technology will continue to roll out through the early part of
the 21st century. And then the relentless process of globalization, the
opening up of national economies and the integration of markets, will
drive the growth through much of the rest of the world. An unprecedented
alignment of an ascendent Asia, a revitalized America, and a
reintegrated greater Europe—including a recovered Russia—together will
create an economic juggernaut that pulls along most other regions of the
planet. These two metatrends—fundamental technological change and a new
ethos of openness—will transform our world into the beginnings of a
global civilization, a new civilization of civilizations, that will
blossom through the coming century.

Think back to the era following World War II, the 40-year span from 1940
to 1980 that immediately precedes our own. First, the US economy was
flooded with an array of new technologies that had been stopped up by
the war effort: mainframe computers, atomic energy, rockets, commercial
aircraft, automobiles, and television. Second, a new integrated market
was devised for half the world—the so-called free world—in part through
the creation of institutions like the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund. With the technology and the enhanced system of
international trade in place by the end of the 1940s, the US economy
roared through the 1950s, and the world economy joined in through the
1960s, only to flame out in the 1970s with high inflation—partly a sign
of growth that came too fast. From 1950 to 1973, the world economy grew
at an average 4.9 percent—a rate not matched since, well, right about
now. On the backs of that roaring economy and increasing prosperity came
social, cultural, and political repercussions. It's no coincidence that
the 1960s were called revolutionary. With spreading affluence came great
pressure from disenfranchised races and other interest groups for social
reform, even overt political revolution.

Strikingly similar—if not still more powerful—forces are in motion
today. The end of the military state of readiness in the 1980s, as in
the 1940s, unleashed an array of new technologies, not the least of
which is the internet. The end of the Cold War also saw the triumph of a
set of ideas long championed by the United States: those of the
free-market economy and, to some extent, liberal democracy. This cleared
the way for the creation of a truly global economy, one integrated
market. Not half the world, the free world. Not one large colonial
empire. Everybody on the planet in the same economy. This is
historically unprecedented, with unprecedented consequences to follow.
In the 1990s, the United States is experiencing a booming economy much
like it did in the 1950s. But look ahead to the next decade, our
parallel to the 1960s. We may be entering a relentless economic
expansion, a truly global economic boom, the long boom.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

Sitting here in the late 1990s, it's possible to see how all the pieces
could fall into place. It's possible to construct a scenario that could
bring us to a truly better world by 2020. It's not a prediction, but a
scenario, one that's both positive and plausible. Why plausible? The
basic science is now in place for five great waves of
technology—personal computers, telecommunications, biotechnology,
nanotechnology, and alternative energy—that could rapidly grow the
economy without destroying the environment. This scenario doesn't rely
on a scientific breakthrough, such as cold fusion, to feed our energy
needs. Also, enough unassailable trends—call them predetermined
factors—are in motion to plausibly predict their outcome. The rise of
Asia, for example, simply can't be stopped. This is not to say that
there aren't some huge unknowns, the critical uncertainties, such as how
the United States handles its key role as world leader.

Why a positive scenario? During the global standoff of the Cold War,
people clung to the original ideological visions of a pure form of
communism or capitalism. A positive scenario too often amounted to
little more than surviving nuclear war. Today, without the old visions,
it's easy enough to see how the world might unravel into chaos. It's
much more difficult to see how it could all weave together into
something better. But without an expansive vision of the future, people
tend to get short-sighted and mean-spirited, looking out only for
themselves. A positive scenario can inspire us through what will
inevitably be traumatic times ahead.

So suspend your disbelief. Open up to the possibilities. Try to think
like one of those future historians, marveling at the changes that took
place in the 40-year period that straddled the new millennium. Sit back
and read through the future history of the world.

The Boom’s Big Bang From a historical vantage point, two developments
start around 1980 that will have profound consequences for the US
economy, the Western economy, then the global economy at large. One is
the introduction of personal computers. The other is the breakup of the
Bell System. These events trigger two of the five great waves of
technological change that will eventually help fuel the long boom.

The full impact can be seen in the sweep of decades. In the first 10
years, personal computers are steadily adopted by businesses. By 1990,
they begin to enter the home, and the microprocessor is being embedded
in many other tools and products, such as cars. By the turn of the
century, with the power of computer chips still roughly doubling every
18 months, everything comes with a small, cheap silicon brain. Tasks
like handwriting recognition become a breeze. Around 2010, Intel builds
a chip with a billion transistors—100 times the complexity of the most
advanced integrated circuits being designed in the late 1990s. By 2015,
reliable simultaneous language translation has been cracked—with
immediate consequences for the multilingual world.

The trajectory for the telecommunications wave follows much the same
arc. The breakup of Ma Bell, initiated in 1982, triggers a frenzy of
entrepreneurial activity as nascent companies like MCI and Sprint race
to build fiber-optic networks across the country. By the early 1990s,
these companies shift from moving voice to moving data as a new
phenomenon seems to come out of nowhere: the internet. Computers and
communications become inextricably linked, each feeding the phenomenal
growth of the other. By the late 1990s, telecom goes wireless. Mobile
phone systems and all-purpose personal communications services arrive
first with vast antennae networks on the ground. Soon after, the big
satellite projects come online. By 1998, the Iridium global phone
network is complete. By 2002, Teledesic's global internet network is
operational. These projects, among others, allow seamless connection to
the information infrastructure anywhere on the planet by early in the
century. By about 2005, high-bandwidth connections that can easily move
video have become common in developed countries, and videophones finally
catch on.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

The symbiotic relationship between these technology sectors leads to a
major economic discontinuity right around 1995, generally attributed to
the explosive growth of the internet. It's the long boom's Big
Bang—immediately fueling economic growth in the traditional sense of
direct job creation but also stimulating growth in less direct ways. On
the most obvious level, hardware and infrastructure companies experience
exponential growth, as building the new information network becomes one
of the great global business opportunities around the turn of the
century.

A new media industry also explodes onto the scene to take advantage of
the network's unique capabilities, such as interactivity and individual
customization. Startups plunge into the field, and traditional media
companies lumber in this direction. By the late 1990s, the titans of the
media industry are in a high-stakes struggle over control of the
evolving medium. Relative newcomers like Disney and Microsoft ace out
the old-guard television networks in a monumental struggle over digital
TV. After a few fits and starts, the Net becomes the main medium of the
21st century.

The development of online commerce quickly follows on new media's heels.
First come the entrepreneurs who figure out how to encrypt messages,
conduct safe financial transactions in cyberspace, and advertise one to
one. Electronic cash, a key milestone, gains acceptance around 1998.
Then come businesses selling everyday consumer goods. First it's high
tech products such as software, then true information products like
securities. Soon everything begins to be sold in cyberspace. By 2000,
online sales hit $10 billion, still small by overall retail standards.
Around 2005, 20 percent of Americans teleshop for groceries.

Alongside the migration of the traditional retail world into cyberspace,
completely new types of work are created. Many had speculated that
computer networks would lead to disintermediation—the growing
irrelevance of the middleman in commerce. Certainly the old-style
go-betweens are sideswiped, but new types of intermediaries arise to
connect buyers to sellers. And with the friction taken out of the
distribution system, the savings can be channeled into new ventures,
which create new work.

The Birth of the Networked Economy New technologies have an impact much
bigger than what literally takes place online. On a more fundamental
level, the networked economy is born. Starting with the recession of
1990-91, American businesses begin going through a wrenching process of
reengineering, variously described at the time as downsizing,
outsourcing, and creating the virtual corporation. In fact, they are
actually taking advantage of new information technologies to create the
smaller, more versatile economic units of the coming era.

Businesses, as well as most organizations outside the business world,
begin to shift from hierarchical processes to networked ones. People
working in all kinds of fields—the professions, education, government,
the arts—begin pushing the applications of networked computers. Nearly
every facet of human activity is transformed in some way by the emergent
fabric of interconnection. This reorganization leads to dramatic
improvements in efficiency and productivity.

Productivity, as it happens, becomes one of the great quandaries
stumping economists throughout the 1990s. Despite billions invested in
new technologies, traditional government economic statistics reflect
little impact on productivity or growth. This is not an academic
point—it drives to the heart of the new economy. Businesses invest in
new technology to boost the productivity of their workers. That
increased productivity is what adds value to the economy—it is the key
to sustained economic growth.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE Research by a few economists, like Stanford
University's Paul Romer, suggests that fundamentally new technologies
generally don't become productive until a generation after their
introduction, the time it takes for people to really learn how to use
them in new ways. Sure enough, about a generation after the introduction
of personal computers in the workplace, work processes begin mutating
enough to take full advantage of the tool. Soon after, economists figure
out how to accurately measure the true gains in productivity—and take
into account the nebulous concept of improvement in quality rather than
just quantity.

By 2000, the US government adopts a new information-age standard of
measuring economic growth. Unsurprisingly, actual growth rates are
higher than what had registered on the industrial-age meter. The US
economy is growing at sustained rates of around 4 percent—rates not seen
since the 1960s.

The turn of the century marks another major shift in government policy,
as the hidebound analysis of inflation is finally abandoned in light of
the behavior of the new economy. While the Vietnam War, oil shocks, and
relatively closed national labor markets had caused genuine inflationary
pressures that wreaked havoc on the economy through the 1970s, the tight
monetary policies of the 1980s soon harness the inflation rate and lead
to a solid decade with essentially no wage or price rises. By the 1990s,
globalization and international competition add to the downward
pressure. By 2000, policymakers finally come around to the idea that you
can grow the economy at much higher rates and still avoid the spiral of
inflation. The millennium also marks a symbolic changing of the guard at
the Federal Reserve Bank: Alan Greenspan retires, the Fed lifts its foot
off the brake, and the US economy really begins to take off.

More Tech Waves Right about the turn of the century, the third of the
five waves of technology kicks in. After a couple false starts in the
1980s and 1990s, biotechnology begins to transform the medical field.
One benchmark comes in 2001 with the completion of the Human Genome
Project, the effort to map out all human genes. That understanding of
our genetic makeup triggers a series of breakthroughs in stopping
genetic disease. Around 2012, a gene therapy for cancer is perfected.
Five years later, almost one-third of the 4,000 known genetic diseases
can be avoided through genetic manipulation.

Throughout the early part of the century, the combination of a deeper
understanding of genetics, human biology, and organic chemistry leads to
a vast array of powerful medications and therapies. The health care
system, having faced a crossroads in 1994 with President Clinton's
proposed national plan, continues restructuring along the more
decentralized, privatized model of HMOs. The industry is already booming
when biotech advances begin clicking in the first decade of the century.
It receives a further stimulus when the baby boomers begin retiring en
masse in 2011. The industry becomes a big jobs provider for years to
come.

The biotech revolution profoundly affects another economic
sector—agriculture. The same deeper understanding of genetics leads to
much more precise breeding of plants. By about 2007, most US produce is
being genetically engineered by these new direct techniques. The same
process takes place with livestock. In 1997, the cloning of sheep in the
United Kingdom startles the world and kicks off a flurry of activity in
this field. By the turn of the century, prize livestock is being
genetically tweaked as often as traditionally bred. By about 2005,
animals are used for developing organs that can be donated to humans.
Superproductive animals and ultrahardy, high-yielding plants bring
another veritable green revolution to countries sustaining large
populations.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

By the end of the transitional era, around 2020, real advances begin to
be made in the field of biological computation, where billions of
relatively slow computations, done at the level of DNA, can be run
simultaneously and brought together in the aggregate to create the
ultimate in parallel processing. So-called DNA computing looks as though
it will bring about big advances in the speed of processing sometime
after 2025—certainly by the middle of the century.

Then comes the fourth technology wave—nanotechnology. Once the realm of
science fiction, this microscopic method of construction becomes a
reality in 2015. Scientists and engineers figure out reliable methods to
construct objects one atom at a time. Among the first commercially
viable products are tiny sensors that can enter a person's bloodstream
and bring back information about its composition. By 2018, these
micromachines are able to do basic cell repair. However, nanotechnology
promises to have a much more profound impact on traditional
manufacturing as the century rolls on. Theoretically, most products
could be produced much more efficiently through nanotech techniques. By
2025, the theory is still far from proven, but small desktop factories
for producing simple products arrive.

By about 2015, nanotech techniques begin to be applied to the
development of computing at the atomic level. Quantum computing, rather
than DNA computing, proves to be the heir to microprocessors in the
short run. In working up to the billion-transistor microprocessor in
2010, engineers seem to hit insurmountable technical barriers: the scale
of integrated circuits has shrunk so small that optical-lithography
techniques fail to function. Fortunately, just as the pace of
microprocessing power begins to wane, quantum computing clicks in.
Frequent increases in computing power once again promise to continue
unabated for the foreseeable future.

The Earth Saver All four waves of technology coursing through this
era—computers, telecom, biotech, and nanotech—contribute to a surge of
economic activity. In the industrial era, a booming economy would have
put a severe strain on the environment: basically everything we made, we
cooked, and such high-temperature cooking creates a lot of waste
by-products. The logic of the era also tended toward larger and larger
factories, which created pollution at even greater scales.

Biotech, on the other hand, uses more moderate temperature realms and
emulates the processes of nature, creating much less pollution.
Infotech, which moves information electronically rather than physically,
also makes much less impact on the natural world. Moving information
across the United States through the relatively simple infotechnology of
the fax, for example, proves to be seven times more energy efficient
than sending it through Federal Express. Furthermore, these technologies
are on an escalating track of constant refinement, with each new
generation becoming more and more energy efficient, with lower and lower
environmental impact. Even so, these increasing efficiencies are not
enough to counteract the juggernaut of a booming global economy.

Fortunately, the fifth wave of new technology—alternative energy—arrives
right around the turn of the century with the introduction of the hybrid
electric car. Stage one begins in the late 1990s when automobile
companies such as Toyota roll out vehicles using small diesel- or
gasoline-fueled internal-combustion engines to power an onboard
generator that then drives small electric motors at each wheel. The car
runs on electric power at low RPMs but uses the internal-combustion
engine at highway speeds, avoiding the problem of completely
battery-powered electric vehicles that run out of juice after 60 miles.
The early hybrids are also much more efficient than regular gas-powered
cars, often getting 80 miles to a gallon.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

Stage two quickly follows, this time spurred by aerospace companies such
as Allied Signal, which leverage their knowledge of jet engines to build
hybrids powered by gas turbines. By 2005, technology previously confined
to aircraft's onboard electric systems successfully migrates to
automobiles. These cars use natural gas to power the onboard generators,
which then drive the electric motors at the wheels. They also make use
of superstrong, ultralight new materials that take the place of steel
and allow big savings on mileage.

Then comes the third and final stage: hybrids using hydrogen fuel cells.
The simplest and most abundant atom in the universe, hydrogen becomes
the source of power for electric generators—with the only waste product
being water. No exhaust. No carbon monoxide. Just water. The basic
hydrogen-power technology had been developed as far back as the Apollo
space program, though then it was still extremely expensive and had a
nasty tendency to blow up. By the late 1990s, research labs such as
British Columbia-based Ballard Power Systems are steadily developing the
technology with little public fanfare. Within 10 years, there are
transitional hydrogen car models that extract fuel from ordinary
gasoline, using the existing network of pumps. By 2010, hydrogen is
being processed in refinery-like plants and loaded onto cars that can go
thousands of miles—and many months—before refueling. The technology is
vastly cheaper and safer than in the 1960s and well on its way to
widespread use.

These technological developments drive nothing less than a wholesale
transformation of the automobile industry through the first quarter of
the new century. Initially prodded by government decrees such as
California's zero-emission mandate—which called for 10 percent of new
cars sold to have zero emissions by 2003—the industrial behemoths begin
to pick up speed when an actual market for hybrid cars opens up. People
buy them not because they are the environmentally correct option but
because they're sporty, fast, and fun. And the auto companies build them
because executives see green—as in money, not trees.

This 10- to 15-year industrial retooling sends reverberations throughout
the global economy. The petrochemical giants begin switching from
maintaining vast networks that bring oil from remote Middle Eastern
deserts to building similarly vast networks that supply the new elements
of electrical power. Fossil fuels will continue to be a primary source
of power into the middle of the 21st century—but they will be clean
fossil fuels. By 2020, almost all new cars are hybrid vehicles, mostly
using hydrogen power. That development alone defuses much of the
pressure on the global environment. The world may be able to support
quite a few additional automobile drivers—including nearly 2 billion
Chinese.

Asia Ascendant While the end of the Cold War initiates the waves of
technology rippling through our 40-year era, that's only half the story.
The other half has to do with an equally powerful force: globalization.
While it is spurred by new technologies, the emergence of an
interconnected planet is propelled more by the power of an idea—the idea
of an open society.

From a historical vantage point, globalization also begins right around
1980. One of the souls who best articulates this idea of the open
society is Mikhail Gorbachev. It's Gorbachev who helps bring about some
of its most dramatic manifestations: the fall of the Wall, the collapse
of the Soviet empire, the end of the Cold War. He helps initiate a vast
wave of political change that includes the democratization of eastern
Europe and Russia itself. To kick it off, Gorbachev introduces two key
concepts to his pals in the Politburo in 1985, two ideas that will
resonate not just in the Soviet Union but through all the world. One is
glasnost. The other is perestroika. Openness and restructuring—the
formula for the age, the key ingredients of the long boom.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

An equally important character is China's Deng Xiaoping. His actions
don't bring about the same dramatic political change, but right around
the same time as Gorbachev, Deng initiates a similarly profound shift of
policies, applying the concepts of openness and restructuring to the
economy. This process of opening up—creating free trade and free
markets—ultimately makes just as large a global impact. No place is this
more apparent than in Asia.

Japan grasps the gist of this economic formula long before the buzz
begins, pulling a group of Asian early adopter countries in its wake. By
the 1980s, Japan has nearly perfected the industrial-age manufacturing
economy. But by 1990, the rules of the global economy have changed to
favor more nimble, innovative processes, rather than meticulous,
methodical economies of scale. Many of the attributes that favored Japan
in the previous era, such as a commitment to lifelong employment and
protected domestic markets, work against the country this time around.
Japan enters the long slump of the 1990s. By the end of the decade,
Japan has watched the United States crack the formula for success in the
networked economy and begins to adopt the model in earnest. In 2000, it
radically liberalizes many of its previously protected domestic
markets—a big stimulus for the world economy at large.

Japan's rise, however, is but a prelude to the ascendance of China. In
1978, Deng takes the first steps toward liberalizing the communist
economy. China slowly gathers force through the 1980s, until the annual
growth in the gross national product consistently tops 10 percent. By
the 1990s, the economy is growing at a torrid pace, with the entire
coast of China convulsed with business activity and boomtowns sprouting
all over the place. Nineteen ninety-seven—a year marked by both the
death of Deng and the long-awaited return of Hong Kong—symbolizes the
end of China's ideological transition and the birth of a real economic
world power.

The first decade of the new century poses many problems for China
domestically—and for the rest of the world. The overheated economy puts
severe strain on the fabric of Chinese society, particularly between the
increasingly affluent urban areas on the coast and the 800 million
impoverished peasants in the interior. The nation's relatively low tech
smokestack economy also threatens to single-handedly push the global
environment over the edge. The Chinese initially do little to reduce
their level of dependence on coal, which in the late 1990s still
supplies three-quarters of the country's energy needs. Only sustained
efforts by the rest of the world to ensure that China has access to the
very best transportation and industrial technology avert an
environmental catastrophe. Occasionally using draconian measures, China
manages to avoid severe internal disturbance. By 2010, the sense of
crisis has dissipated. China is generally acknowledged to be on a path
toward more democratic politics—though not in the image of the West.

With the reemergence of China's economic might, the 3,500-year-old
civilization begins to assert itself and play a larger part in shaping
the world. Chinese clan-based culture happens to work very well within
the fluid demands of the networked global economy. Singapore and Hong
Kong prove the point through the 1980s and 1990s, when the two
city-states with almost no land mass or natural resources become
economic powers through pure human capital, primarily brainpower.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

For years, Chinese expatriates have established intricate financial
networks throughout Western countries, but especially in Asia. Many
Southeast Asian economies—if not governments—are completely dominated by
the overseas Chinese. By about 2005, the mainland Chinese decide to
capitalize on this by formalizing the Chinese diaspora. Though the
entity has no legal status vis-a-vis other governments, it has
substantial economic clout. That date also marks the absorption of
Taiwan into China proper.

By 2020, the Chinese economy has grown to be the largest in the world.
Though the US economy is more technologically sophisticated, and its
population more affluent, China and the United States are basically on a
par. China has also drawn much of Asia in its economic wake—Hong Kong
and Shanghai are the key financial nodes for this intricate Asian world.

Asia is jammed with countries that are economic powerhouses in their own
right. India builds on its top-notch technical training and mastery of
the lingua franca of the high tech world, English, to challenge many
Western countries in software development. Malaysia's audacious attempt
to jump-start an indigenous high tech sector through massive investments
in a multimedia supercorridor pays off. The former communist countries
Vietnam and Cambodia turn out to be among the most adept at capitalism.
The entire region—from the reunited Koreas to Indonesia to the
subcontinent—is booming. In just 20 years, 2 billion people have made
the transition into what can be considered a middle-class lifestyle. In
the space of one full 80-year life span, Asia has gone from almost
uninterrupted poverty to widespread wealth.

The European Shuffle Meanwhile, on the other side of the planet, the new
principles of openness and restructuring are applied first in politics,
then economics. In the aftermath of the spectacular implosion of the
Soviet Union, most energy is spent promoting democracy and dismantling
the vestiges of the Cold War. With time, an equal amount of energy is
applied to restructuring and retooling economies—in some obvious and not
so obvious ways.

First, Europe at large has to reintegrate itself, both economically and
politically. Much of the 1990s is spent trying to integrate eastern and
western Europe. All eyes first focus on the new Germany, which powers
through the process on the basis of sheer financial might. Next the more
advanced of the eastern European countries—Poland, Hungary, the Czech
Republic—get integrated, first into NATO, with formal acceptance in
2000, and then into the European Union in 2002. The more problematic
countries of eastern Europe aren't accepted into the union for another
couple years. Alongside this East-West integration comes a more subtle
integration between the western European countries. With fits and
starts, Europe moves toward the establishment of one truly integrated
entity. The European currency—the euro—is adopted in 1999, with a few
laggards, like Britain, holding out a few more years.

Though the UK may have dragged its feet on the European currency
measure, in an overall sense it's far ahead of the pack. The economic
imperative of the era is not just to integrate externally but to
restructure internally. Right around 1980, Margaret Thatcher and Ronald
Reagan begin putting together the formula that eventually leads toward
the new economy. At the time it looks brutal: busting unions, selling
off state-owned industries, and dismantling the welfare state. In
hindsight, the pain pays off. By the mid-1990s, the US unemployment rate
is near 5 percent, and the British rate has dropped to almost 6 percent.
In contrast, unemployment on the European continent hovers at 11
percent, with some individual countries even higher.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

Indeed, through the 1990s, the rest of Europe remains trapped in the
legacy of its welfare states, which maintain their political
attractiveness long after they outlive their economic worth. By 2000,
chronic unemployment and mounting government deficits finally force
leaders on the continent to act. Despite widespread popular protests,
especially in France, Europe goes through a painful economic
restructuring much like the United States did a decade before. As part
of this perestroika, it retools its economy using the new information
technologies. This restructuring, both of corporations and governments,
has much the same effect it had on the US economy. The European economy
begins to surge and create many new jobs. By about 2005,
Europe—particularly in the northern countries like Germany—even has the
beginnings of a serious labor shortage as aging populations begin to
retire.

Then the Russian economy kicks in. For 15 years, Russia had been
stumbling along in its transition to a capitalist economy, periodically
frightening the West with overtures that it might return to its old
militaristic ways. But after almost two decades of wide-open Mafia-style
capitalism, Russia emerges in about 2005 with the basic underpinnings of
a solid economy. Enough people are invested in the new system, and
enough of the population has absorbed the new work ethic, that the
economy can function quite well—with few reasons to fear a retrenchment.
This normalization finally spurs massive foreign investment that helps
the Russians exploit their immense natural resources, and the skills of
a highly educated populace. These people also provide a huge market for
Europe and the rest of the world.

The Global Stampede By the close of the 20th century, the more developed
Western nations are forging ahead on a path of technology-led growth,
and booming Asia is showing the unambiguous benefits of developing
market economies and free trade. The path for the rest of the world
seems clear. Openness and restructuring. Restructuring and openness.
Individually, nations begin adopting the formula of deregulating,
privatizing, opening up to foreign investment, and cutting government
deficits. Collectively, they sign onto international agreements that
accelerate the process of global integration—and fuel the long boom.

Two milestones come in 1997: the Information Technology Agreement, in
which almost all countries trading in IT agree to abolish tariffs by
2000, and the Global Telecommunications Accord, in which almost 70
leading nations agree to rapidly deregulate their domestic telecom
markets. These two developments quickly spread the two key technologies
of the era: computers and telecommunications.

Everyone benefits, particularly the underdeveloped economies, which take
advantage of the leapfrog effect, adopting the newest, cheapest, best
technology rather than settling for obsolete junk. IT creates a
remarkable dynamic that brings increasing power, performance, and
quality to each new generation of the technology—plus big drops in
price. Also, wireless telecommunications allow countries to avoid the
huge effort and expense of building wired infrastructures through
crowded cities and diffuse countrysides.

By 2005, the world economic growth rate hits an astounding 6 percent—a
rate that will double the size of the world economy in just 12 years.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

This all bodes well for the world economy. Through most of the 1970s,
all the 1980s, and the early 1990s, the real growth rate in the world's
gross domestic product averages 3 percent. By 1996, the rate tops a
robust 4 percent. By 2005, it hits an astounding 6 percent. Continued
growth at this rate will double the size of the world economy in just 12
years, doubling it twice in just 25 years. This level of growth
surpasses the rates of the last global economic boom, the years
following World War II, which averaged 4.9 percent from 1950 to 1973.
And this growth comes off a much broader economic base, making it more
remarkable still. Unlike the last time, almost every region of the
planet, even in the undeveloped world, participates in the bonanza.

Latin America takes off. These countries, after experiencing the
nightmare of debt in the 1980s, do much to vigorously restructure their
economies in the 1990s. Chile and Argentina are particularly innovative,
and Brazil builds on an extensive indigenous high tech sector. But the
real boost from 2000 onward comes from capitalizing on Latin America's
strategic location on the booming Pacific Rim and on its proximity to
the United States. The region becomes increasingly drawn into the
booming US economy. In 1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement
formally links the United States to Mexico and Canada. By about 2002, an
All American Free Trade Agreement is signed—integrating the entire
hemisphere into one unified market.

The Middle East, meanwhile, enters crisis. Two main factors drive the
region's problems. One, the fundamentalist Muslim mind-set is
particularly unsuited to the fluid demands of the digital age. The new
economy rewards experimentation, constant innovation, and challenging
the status quo—these attributes, however, are shunned in many countries
throughout the Middle East. Many actually get more traditional in
response to the furious pace of change. The other factor driving the
crisis is outside their control. The advent of hydrogen power clearly
undermines the centrality of oil in the world economy. By 2008, with the
auto industry in a mad dash to convert, the bottom falls out of the oil
market. The Middle Eastern crisis comes to a head. Some of the old
monarchies and religious regimes begin to topple.

An even more disturbing crisis hits Africa. While some parts of the
continent, such as greater South Africa, are doing fine, central Africa
devolves into a swirl of brutal ethnic conflict, desperate poverty,
widespread famine and disease. In 2015 the introduction of biological
weapons in an ethnic conflict, combined with the outbreak of a
terrifying new natural disease, brings the death count to unimagined
levels: an estimated 5 million people die in the space of six
months—this on top of a cumulative death toll of roughly 100 million who
perished prematurely over the previous two decades.

The contrast between such destitution and the spreading prosperity
elsewhere finally prods the planet into collective action. Every nation,
the world comes to understand, ultimately can only benefit from a
thriving Africa, which will occupy economic niches that other nations
are outgrowing. It makes as much practical as humanitarian sense. The
regeneration of Africa becomes a prime global agenda item for the next
quarter of the century.

Future Aftershocks Riding the wave of the booming economy brings other
major social and political repercussions. Fundamental shifts in
technology and the means of production inevitably change the way the
economy operates. And when the economy changes, it doesn't take long for
the rest of society to adapt to the new realities. The classic example
is the transformation of agricultural society into industrial society. A
new tool—the motor—led to a new economic model—capitalism—that brought
great social upheaval—urbanization and the creation of an affluent
class—and ultimately profound political change—liberal democracy. While
that's a crude summation of a complex historical transition, the same
dynamic largely holds true in our shift to a networked economy based on
digital technologies.

There's also a commonsense explanation. When an economy booms, money
courses through society, people get rich quick, and almost everybody
sees an opportunity to improve their station in life. Optimism abounds.
Think back to that period following World War II. A booming economy
buoyed a bold, optimistic view of the world: we can put a man on the
Moon, we can build a Great Society, a racially integrated world. In our
era, we can expect the same.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

By about 2000, the United States economy is doing so well that the tax
coffers begin to swell. This not only solves the deficit problem but
gives the government ample resources to embark on new initiatives. No
longer forced to nitpick over which government programs to cut,
political leaders emerge with new initiatives to help solve seemingly
intractable social problems, like drug addiction. No one talks about
reverting to big government, but there's plenty of room for innovative
approaches to applying the pooled resources of the entire society to
benefit the public at large. And the government, in good conscience, can
finally afford tax cuts.

A spirit of generosity returns. The vast majority of Americans who see
their prospects rising with the expanding economy are genuinely
sympathetic to the plight of those left behind. This kinder, gentler
humanitarian urge is bolstered by a cold, hard fact. The bigger the
network, the better. The more people in the network, the better for
everyone. Wiring half a town is only marginally useful. If the entire
town has phones, then the system really sings. Every person, every
business, every organization directly benefits from a system in which
you can pick up a phone and reach every individual rather than just a
scattered few. That same principle true holds for the new networked
computer technologies. It pays to get everyone tied into the new
information grid. By 2000, this mentality sinks in. Almost everyone
understands we're deep into a transition to a networked economy, a
networked society. It makes sense to get everyone on board.

The welfare reform initiative of 1996 begins the process of drawing the
poor into the economy at large. At the time, political leaders aren't
talking about the network effect so much as eliminating a wasteful
government program. Nevertheless, the shakeup of the welfare system
coincides with the revving of the economy. Vast numbers of welfare
recipients do get jobs, and the great majority eventually move up to
more skilled professions. By 2002, the end of the initial five-year
transitional period, welfare rolls are cut by more than half. Former
welfare recipients are not the only ones benefiting from the new
economy. The working poor hovering just above the poverty line also
leverage their way up to more stable lives.

Even those from the hardened criminal underworld migrate toward the
expanding supply of legitimate work. Over time, through the first decade
of the century, this begins to have subtle secondary effects. The
underclass, once thought to be a permanent fixture of American society,
begins to break up. Social mobility goes up, crime rates go down. Though
hard to draw direct linkages, many attribute the drop in crime to the
rise in available work. Others point to a shift in drug policy. Starting
with the passage of the California Medical Marijuana Initiative n 1996,
various states begin experimenting with decriminalizing drug use.
Alongside that, the failed war on drugs gets dismantled. Both
initiatives are part of a general shift away from stiff law enforcement
and toward more complex ways to deal with the roots of crime. One effect
is to destroy the conditions that led to the rise of the inner-city drug
economy. By the second decade of the century, the glorified gangsta is
as much a part of history as the original gangsters in the days of
Prohibition.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

Immigrants also benefit from the booming economy. Attempts to stem
immigration in the lean times of the early 1990s are largely foiled. By
the late 1990s, immigrants are seen as valuable contributors who keep
the economy humming—more able hands and brains. By the first decade of
the century, government policy actively encourages immigration of
knowledge workers—particularly in the software industry, which suffers
from severe labor shortages. This influx of immigrants, coupled with
Americans' changing attitudes toward them, brings a pleasant surprise:
the revival of the family. The centrality of the family in Asian and
Latino cultures, which form the bulk of these immigrants, is
unquestioned. As these subcultures increasingly flow into the American
mainstream, a subtle shift takes place in the general belief in the
importance of family. It's not family in the nuclear-family sense but a
more sprawling, amorphous, networked sense of family to fit the new
times.

The Brain Wave Education is the next industrial-era institution to go
through a complete overhaul—starting in earnest in 2000. The driving
force here is not so much concern with enlightening young minds as
economics. In an information age, the age of the knowledge worker,
nothing matters as much as that worker's brain. By the end of the 1990s,
it becomes clear that the existing public K-12 school system is simply
not up to the task of preparing those brains. For decades the old system
has ossified and been gutted by caps on property taxes. Various reform
efforts gather steam only to peter out. First George Bush then Bill
Clinton try to grab the mantle of "education president"—both fail. That
changes in the 2000 election, when reinventing education becomes a
central campaign issue. A strong school system is understood to be as as
vital to the national interest as the military once was. The resulting
popular mandate shifts some of the billions once earmarked for defense
toward revitalizing education.

The renaissance of education in the early part of the century comes not
from a task force of luminaries setting national standards in
Washington, DC—the solutions flow from the hundreds of thousands of
people throwing themselves at the problems across the country. The 1980s
and 1990s see the emergence of small, innovative private schools that
proliferate in urban areas where the public schools are most abysmal.
Many focus on specific learning philosophies and experiment with new
teaching techniques—including the use of new computer technologies.
Beginning around 2001, the widespread use of vouchers triggers a rapid
expansion in these types of schools and spurs an entrepreneurial market
for education reminiscent of the can-do ethos of Silicon Valley. Many of
the brightest young minds coming out of college are drawn to the
wide-open possibilities in the field—starting new schools, creating new
curricula, devising new teaching methods. They're inspired by the idea
that they're building the 21st-century paradigm for learning.

By 2020, the great cross-fertilization of ideas, the never-ending
planetary conversation, has begun.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE The excitement spreads far beyond private
schools, which by 2010 are teaching about a quarter of all students.
Public schools reluctantly face up to the new competitive environment
and begin reinventing themselves. In fact, private and public schools
maintain a symbiotic relationship, with private schools doing much of
the initial innovating, and public schools concentrating on making sure
the new educational models reach all children in society.

Higher education, though slightly less in need of an overhaul, catches
the spirit of radical reform—again driven largely by economics. The cost
of four-year colleges and universities becomes absurd—in part because
antiquated teaching methods based on lectures are so labor intensive.
The vigorous adoption of networking technologies benefits undergraduate
and graduate students even more than K-12 kids. In 2001, Project
Gutenberg completes its task of putting 10,000 books online. Many of the
world's leading universities begin carving off areas of expertise and
assuming responsibility for the digitalization of all the literature in
that field. Around 2010, all new books come out in electronic form. By
2015, relatively complete virtual libraries are up and running.

Despite earlier rhetoric, the key factor in making education work comes
not from new technology, but from enshrining the value of learning. A
dramatic reduction in the number of unskilled jobs makes clear that good
education is a matter of survival. Indeed, nearly every organization in
society puts learning at the core of its strategy for adapting to a
fast-changing world. So begins the virtuous circle of the learning
society. The booming economy provides the resources to overhaul
education. The products of that revamped educational system enter the
economy and improve its productivity. Eventually, education both sows
and reaps the benefits of the long boom.

In the first decade of the century, Washington finally begins to really
reinvent government. It's much the same process as the reengineering of
corporations in the 1990s. The hierarchical bureaucracies of the 20th
century are flattened and networked through the widespread adoption of
new technologies. Some, like the IRS, experience spectacular failures,
but eventually make the transition. In a more important sense, the
entire approach to government is fundamentally reconsidered. The welfare
and education systems are the first down that path. Driven by the
imminent arrival of the first of many retiring baby boomers in 2011,
Medicare and Social Security are next. Other governmental sectors soon
follow.

The second decade of the century marks a more ambitious but amorphous
project: making a multicultural society really work. Though the United
States has the mechanics—such as the legal framework—of an integrated
society in place, Americans need to learn how to accept social
integration on a deeper level. The underpinnings of a booming economy
make efforts to ease the tensions among various ethnic and interest
groups much easier than before: people are more tolerant of others when
their own livelihoods are not threatened. But people also come around to
seeing diversity as a way to spark a creative edge. They realize that
part of the key for success in the future is to remain open to
differences, to stay exposed to alternative ways of thinking. And they
recognize the rationality of building a society that draws on the
strengths and creativity of all people.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE Women spearhead many of the changes that help
make the multicultural society work. As half the population, they are an
exceptional "minority" that helps pave the way for the racial and ethnic
minorities with fewer numbers. In the last global boom of the 1960s, the
women's movement gained traction and helped promote the rise in the
status of women. Through the 1970s and 1980s, women push against
traditional barriers and work their way into business and government. By
the 1990s, women have permeated the entire fabric of the economy and
society. The needs, desires, and values of women increasingly begin to
drive the political and business worlds—largely for the better. By the
early part of the century, it becomes clear that the very skills most
needed to make the networked society really hum are those that women
have long practiced. Long before it became fashionable, women were
developing the subtle abilities of maintaining networks, of remaining
inclusive, of negotiating. These skills prove to be crucial to solving
the very different challenges of this new world.

The effort to build a truly inclusive society does not just impact
Americans. At the turn of the century, the United States is the closest
thing the world has to a workable multicultural society. Almost all the
cultures of the world have some representation, several in significant
proportions. As the century moves on, it becomes clear to most people on
the planet that all cultures must coexist in relative harmony on a
global scale. On a meta level, it seems that the world is heading toward
a future that's prefaced by what's happening in the United States.

A Civilization of Civilizations In 2020, humans arrive on Mars. It's an
extraordinary event by any measure, coming a half century after people
first set foot on the Moon. The four astronauts touch down and beam
their images back to the 11 billion people sharing in the moment. The
expedition is a joint effort supported by virtually all nations on the
planet, the culmination of a decade and a half of intense focus on a
common goal. A remarkable enough technical achievement, the Mars landing
is even more important for what it symbolizes.

10 Scenario Spoilers The long boom is a scenario, one possible future.
It’s built upon the convergence of many big forces and even more little
pieces falling into place—all of them with a positive twist. The future
of course, could turn out to be very different—particularly if a few of
those big pieces go haywire. Here are 10 things that could cut short the
long boom.

1. Tensions between China and the US escalate into a new Cold
War—bordering on a hot one.

2. New technologies turn out to be a bust. They simply don’t bring the
expected productivity increases or the big economic boosts.

3. Russia devolves into a kleptocracy run by a mafia or retreats into
quasicommunist nationalism that threatens Europe.

4. Europe’s integration process grinds to a halt. Eastern and western
Europe can’t finesse a reunification, and even the European Union
process breaks down.

5. Major ecological crisis causes a global climate change that, among
other things, disrupts the food supply—causing big price increases
everywhere and sporadic famines.

6. Major rise in crime and terrorism forces the world to pull back in
fear. People who constantly feel they could be blown up or ripped off
are not in the mood to reach out and open up.

7. The cumulative escalation in pollution causes a dramatic increase in
cancer, which overwhelms the ill-prepared health system.

8. Energy prices go through the roof. Convulsions in the Middle East
disrupt the oil supply, and the alternative energy sources fail to
materialize.

9. An uncontrollable plague—a modern-day influenza epidemic or its
equivalent—takes off like wildfire, killing upward of 200 million
people.

10. A social and cultural backlash stops progress dead in its tracks.
Human beings need to choose to move forward. They just may not …

As the global viewing audience stares at the image of a distant Earth,
seen from a neighboring planet 35 million miles away, the point is made
as never before: We are one world. All organisms crammed on the globe
are intricately interdependent. Plants, animals, humans need to find a
way to live together on that tiny little place. By 2020, most people are
acting on that belief. The population has largely stabilized. The
spreading prosperity nudged a large enough block of people into
middle-class lifestyles to curtail high birth rates. In some pockets of
the world large families are still highly valued, but most people strive
only to replicate themselves, and no more. Just as important, the world
economy has evolved to a point roughly in balance with nature. To be
sure, the ecosystem is not in perfect equilibrium. More pollution enters
the world than many would like. But the rates of contamination have been
greatly reduced, and the trajectory of these trends looks promising. The
regeneration of the global environment is in sight.

The images from Mars drive home another point: We're one global society,
one human race. The divisions we impose on ourselves look ludicrous from
afar. The concept of a planet of warring nations, a state of affairs
that defined the previous century, makes no sense. Far better to channel
the aspirations of the world's people into collectively pushing outward
to the stars. Far better to turn our technologies not against one
another but toward a joint effort that benefits all. And the artificial
divisions we perpetuate between races and genders look strange as well.
All humans stand on equal footing. They're not the same, but they're
treated as equals and given equal opportunities to excel. In 2020, this
point, only recently an empty platitude, is accepted by almost all.

We're forming a new civilization, a global civilization, distinct from
those that arose on the planet before. It's not just Western
civilization writ large—one hegemonic culture forcing itself on others.
It's not a resurgent Chinese civilization struggling to reassert itself
after years of being thwarted. It's a strange blend of both—and the
others. It's something different, something as yet being born. In 2020,
information technologies have spread to every corner of the planet.
Real-time language translation is reliable. The great
cross-fertilization of ideas, the ongoing, never-ending planetary
conversation has begun. From this, the new crossroads of all
civilizations, the new civilization will emerge.

In many ways, it's a civilization of civilizations, to use a phrase
coined by Samuel Huntington. We're building a framework where all the
world's civilizations can exist side by side and thrive. Where the best
attributes of each can stand out and make their unique contributions.
Where the peculiarities are cherished and allowed to live on. We're
entering an age where diversity is truly valued—the more options the
better. Our ecosystem works best that way. Our market economy works best
that way. Our civilization, the realm of our ideas, works best that way,
too.

The Millennial Generation By 2020, the world is about to go through a
changeover in power. This happens not through force, but through natural
succession, a generational transition. The aging baby boomers, born in
the wake of World War II, at the beginning of the 20th century's 40-year
global economic boom, are fading from their prominent positions of
economic and moral leadership. The tough-minded, techno-savvy generation
that trails them, the digital generation, has the new world wired. But
these two generations have simply laid the groundwork, prepared the
foundations for the society, the civilization that comes next.

The millennial generation is coming of age. These are the children born
in the 1980s and 1990s, at the front end of this boom of all booms.
These are the kids who have spent their entire lives steeped in the new
technologies, living in a networked world. They have been educated in
wired schools, they have taken their first jobs implicitly understanding
computer technologies. Now they're doing the bulk of society's work.
They are reaching their 40s and turning their attention to the next
generation of problems that remain to be cracked.

These are higher-level concerns, the intractable problems—such as
eradicating poverty on the planet—that people throughout history have
believed impossible to solve. Yet this generation has witnessed an
extraordinary spread of prosperity across the planet. They see no
inherent barrier to keep them from extending that prosperity to—why
not?—everyone. Then there's the environment. The millennial generation
has inherited a planet that's not getting much worse. Now comes the more
difficult problem of restoration, starting with the rain forests. Then
there's governance. Americans can vote electronically from home starting
with the presidential election of 2008. But e-voting is just an
extension of the 250-year-old system of liberal democracy. Interactive
technologies may allow radically new forms of participatory democracy on
a scale never imagined. Many young people say that the end of the
nation-state is in sight.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

These ambitious projects will not be solved in a decade, or two, or even
three. But the life span of this generation will stretch across the
entire 21st century. Given the state of medical science, most members of
the millennial generation will live 100 years. Over the course of their
lifetimes, they confidently foresee the solutions to many seemingly
intractable problems. And they fully expect to see some big surprises.
Almost certainly there will be unexpected breakthroughs in the realm of
science and technology. What will be the 21st-century equivalent of the
discovery of the electron or DNA? What strange new ideas will emerge
from the collective mind of billions of brains wired together throughout
the planet? What will happen when members of this millennial generation
possibly confront a new species of their own making: Homo superior? And
what happens if after all the efforts to methodically scan the skies,
they finally latch onto signs of intelligent life?

Just Do It Beam back down to Planet Earth. Get your head back to 1997,
not even halfway through the transition of this 40-year era. We're still
on the front edge of the great global boom, the long boom. Almost all
the work remains before us. And a hell of a lot of things could go
wrong.

This is only a scenario of the future, by no means an outright
prediction of what is to come. We can be reasonably confident of the
continuation of certain trends. Much of the long boom's technology is
already in motion and almost inevitably will appear within that span.
Asia is ascendant whether we like it or not. Barring some bizarre
catastrophe, that large portion of the world will continue to boom. But
there are many unknowns, all kinds of critical uncertainties. Will
Europe summon the political will to make the transition to the new
economy? Will Russia avoid a nationalist retrenchment and establish a
healthy market economy—let alone democracy? Will China fully embrace
capitalism and avoid causing a new cold—or hot—war? Will a rise in
terrorism cause the world to pull back in constant fear? It's not
technology or economics that pose the biggest challenges to the long
boom. It's political factors, the ones dependent on strong leadership.

One hundred years ago, the world went through a similar process of
technical innovation and unprecedented economic integration that led to
a global boom. New transportation and communications
technologies—railroads, telegraphs, and telephones—spread all over the
planet, enabling a coordination of economic activity at a level never
seen before. Indeed, the 1890s have many parallels to the 1990s—for
better or worse. The potential of new technologies appeared boundless.
An industrial revolution was spurring social and political revolution.
It couldn't be long, it seemed, before a prosperous, egalitarian society
arrived. It was a wildly optimistic time.

Of course, it all ended in catastrophe. The leaders of the world
increasingly focused on narrow national agendas. The nations of the
world broke from the path of increasing integration and lined up in
competing factions. The result was World War I, with everyone using the
new technologies to wage bigger, more efficient war. After the conflict,
the continued pursuit of nationalist agendas severely punished the
losers and consolidated colonial empires. The world went from wild
optimism to—quite literally—depression, in a very short time.


MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE ADVERTISEMENT

The lessons of World War I contrast sharply with those of World War II.
The move toward a closed economy and society after the first war led to
global fragmentation as nations pulled back on themselves. In the
aftermath of World War II, the impetus was toward an open economy and
society—at least in half the world. This led down a path of continuing
integration. World leaders had the foresight to establish an array of
international institutions to manage the emerging global economy. They
worked hard to rebuild their vanquished enemies, Germany and Japan,
through generous initiatives like the Marshall Plan. This philosophical
shift from closed to open societies came about through bold leadership,
much of it coming from the United States. In the wake of World War I,
American political and business leaders embraced isolationism—with
severe consequences for the world. After World War II, they did the
opposite—with very different results.

Today, the United States has a similarly crucial leadership role to
play. There are purely practical reasons for this. The United States has
the single largest economy in the world, a market with a big influence
on the flow of world trade. It has the biggest research and scientific
establishment by far. Since the demise of the Soviet Union, no other
country features a comparable array of university research facilities,
corporate industrial labs, and nonprofit think tanks. That combination
of a huge economy and a scientific elite gives the United States the
world's strongest military; the country can develop the weapons and pay
the bills. For the next 15 years at the very least, America will be the
preeminent military power. These reasons alone ensure that the United
States, regardless of the intentions of its leaders, will have a huge
influence on any future scenario. But the role of the United States is
more involved, more complicated than that.

The United States is the great innovator nation, the incubator of new
ideas. Just as the new technologies of the early Industrial Revolution
were born in England, the vast majority of innovations in the computer
and telecommunications fields are happening now in the United States.
Americans are fundamentally shaping the core technologies and
infrastructure that will be at the foundation of the 21st century.
Partly because of that, the US is the first country to transition to the
new economy. American corporations are the first to adopt the new
technologies and adapt to the changing economic realities. As a nation,
the United States is figuring out how to finesse the new model of high
economic growth driven by new technologies. The American people are
feeling the first social and cultural effects. And the government is the
first to come under the strain to change. The United States is paving
the way for other developed nations and, eventually, the rest of the
nations of the world.

With the coming wired, global society, openness has never been more
important. It’s the linchpin that makes everything work.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE Even more important, the United States serves as
steward of the idea of an open society. The US is home to the core
economic and political values that emerged from the 20th century—the
free-market economy and democracy. But the idea of an open society is
broader than that. Americans believe in the free flow of ideas,
products, and people. Historically, this has taken the form of
protecting speech, promoting trade, and welcoming immigrants. With the
coming of a wired, global society, the concept of openness has never
been more important. It's the linchpin that will make the new world
work.

In a nutshell, the key formula for the coming age is this: Open, good.
Closed, bad. Tattoo it on your forehead. Apply it to technology
standards, to business strategies, to philosophies of life. It's the
winning concept for individuals, for nations, for the global community
in the years ahead. If the world takes the closed route, it starts a
vicious circle: Nations turn inward. The world fragments into isolated
blocs. This strengthens traditionalists and leads to rigidity of
thought. This stagnates the economy and brings increasing poverty. This
leads to conflicts and increasing intolerance, which promotes an even
more closed society and a more fragmented world. If, on the other hand,
the world adopts the open model, then a much different, virtuous circle
begins: Open societies turn outward and strive to integrate into the
world. This openness to change and exposure to new ideas leads to
innovation and progress. This brings rising affluence and a decrease in
poverty. This leads to growing tolerance and appreciation of diversity,
which promotes a more open society and a more highly integrated world.

The United States, as first among equals, needs to live this concept in
the coming decades. One of the first great tasks will be integrating its
former communist adversaries China and Russia into the world community,
in much the same way that it once did Japan and Germany. This will be
the main geopolitical challenge of the next dozen years. We'll know if
we made it by 2010. Then there's the need to create a complex fabric of
new global economic and political institutions to fit the 21st century.
Though these need not take the bureaucratic shape they did in the past,
a certain level of coordination of global activities will continue to
fall in the public sphere. In the technical realm, some body needs to
mediate the setting of global technical standards and the allocation of
what are, at the moment, scarce resources like airwaves. In the legal
arena, we need to find ways to protect the rights of creators and
consumers of intellectual property. In terms of the environment, the
collective world community needs to get cracking on problems that
endanger everyone: global climate change, loss of the ozone layer, and
other cross-border problems like acid rain. And then there are the
issues that fall under security. We spent decades in excruciating
negotiation to disarm and limit nuclear proliferation. In an age of
information warfare, we face a very different set of security concerns
and a laborious process to find global solutions—starting with a
workable accord on cryptography.

MOST POPULAR Inside the Gay Tech Mafia THE BIG STORY Inside the Gay Tech
Mafia BY ZOË BERNARD A Vast Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May
Put Millions at Risk of Identity Theft CYBERATTACKS AND HACKS A Vast
Trove of Exposed Social Security Numbers May Put Millions at Risk of
Identity Theft BY LILY HAY NEWMAN Meta and Other Tech Firms Put
Restrictions on Use of OpenClaw Over Security Fears ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE Meta and Other Tech Firms Put Restrictions on Use of
OpenClaw Over Security Fears BY PARESH DAVE Mark Zuckerberg Tries to
Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial Testimony SOCIAL MEDIA Mark
Zuckerberg Tries to Play It Safe in Social Media Addiction Trial
Testimony BY MILES KLEE The vast array of problems to solve and the
sheer magnitude of the changes that need to take place are enough to
make any global organization give up, any nation back down, any
reasonable person curl up in a ball. That's where Americans have one
final contribution to make: optimism, that maddening can-do attitude
that often drives foreigners insane. Americans don't understand limits.
They have boundless confidence in their ability to solve problems. And
they have an amazing capacity to think they really can change the world.
A global transformation over the next quarter century inevitably will
bring a tremendous amount of trauma. The world will run into a daunting
number of problems as we transition to a networked economy and a global
society. Apparent progress will be followed by setbacks. And all along
the way the chorus of naysayers will insist it simply can't be done.
We'll need some hefty doses of indefatigable optimism. We'll need an
optimistic vision of what the future can be.